交叉信息研究院 普通物理（1）（英）   General Physics(1)(in English) Calculus-based first physics course  for physics majors and students with a serious interest  in physics. Students are  required  to  actively  participate  during  the  lectures,  asking  questions,  and  having  questions  asked.  This  class  will provide  you  with  an  enhanced  opportunity  to  acquire  a  good  understanding  of  fundamental  mechanics  and thermodynamics and to learn how to apply this understanding to physics and beyond.  普通物理（2）(英) General Physics(2)(in English)  This  course  is  a  follow-up  course  of  General  Physics  I  and  for  undergraduate  students  with  serious  interests  in physics  and  interdisciplinary  sciences.  The  main  focus  of  this  course  is  to  cover  the  most  important  topics  in classical electrodynamics  including electrostatics, magnetostatics, Maxwell’s equations  for electromagnetic  fields, and  special  relativity.  This  course  will  emphasize  both  basic  concepts  and  solving  practical  problems.  After completing this course, students are expected to gain a good understanding of basic classical electrodynamics.   计算机入门  Introduction to Computer Science Designed  to  appeal  to  a  diverse  audience,  this  course  examines  some  of  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the  science  of computing.  Lectures  and  hands-on  assignments  cover  a  wide  variety  of  topics  such  as  hardware  organization,  the Internet, computer programming, limits of computing, and graphics. No prerequisite.   计算机应用数学  Mathematics for Computer Science This  course  aims  to  introduce  the  fundamental  mathematical  techniques  useful  for  computer  science undergraduate  majors,  illustrated  with  a  rich  spectrum  of  applications.  Modern  computer  science education requires the students to be equipped with broad knowledge in mathematics, so that they could cope  with  current  and  future  technological  challenges  handily  and  innovatively.  In  this  course, mathematical  techniques  from  algebra,  geometry,  probability  theory,  stochastic  modeling,  and information  theory will be covered. These  techniques will be applied  to algorithmic and design problems in  various  topics,  including  internet,  cryptography,  distributed  systems,  wireless  sensor  network, optimization, etc. Finally, this course introduces the students to deep scienti fic issues in the foundation of computing such as undecidability, complexity, and quantum computers.  操作系统  Operating System In  this  course,  student  will  learn  the  design  principles  of  operating  systems,  and  techniques  to  build  a  complex software  systems.    Topics  covered  in  this  course  include  operating  systems  structure,  multi -programming (processes, inter-process  communication,  and  synchronization),  memory  management  (virtual  memory, segmentation,  and  paging),  scheduling,  file  systems,  system  security,  basic  computer  networking  (switching, protocols),  and  basic  concept  on  database  management  systems  (transaction).    In  addition  to  classroom instruction, the students are required to complete a substantial programming project.  计算生物学  Computational Biology To  introduce  various  computational  problems  for  analyzing  biological  data  (e.g.  DNA,  RNA,  protein  sequences, and  biological  networks)  and  the  algorithms  for  solving  these  problems.  Topics  covered  include:  biological sequence  analysis,  gene  identification,  regulatory  motif  discovery,  genome  assembly,  genome  duplication  and rearrangements, evolutionary theory, clustering algorithms, and scale-free networks.  机器学习  Machine learning Machine  learning  studies  how  computers  can  learn  from  experiences. Combining  ideas  from  theoretical  computer science and statistics, researchers have developed many learning methods and their applications to computer vision, bioinformatics,  natural  language  processing  etc.  are  highly  successful.  Machine  learning  theory  addresses  the fundamental  problems  in  learning.  It  studies  the  power  and  theoretical  limits  of  learning.  The  aim  is  to  provide deep understand of learning and the guidance for the development  of practical algorithms.  高等计算机图形学 Advanced Computer Graphics  本课程是为清华大学计算机系本科生开设的选修课，旨在介绍计算机图形学的基本概念、理论、方法和系统，主要内容包括：颜色模型、光照模型、明暗处理、纹理、光线跟踪算法、曲线曲面造型和几何处理等。  算法设计  Algorithm Design This  course  gives  an  introduction  to  the  basics  of  algorithm,  common  algorithm  design  techniques,  and  the analysis of  running  time  (complexity). The main contents  include:  tools of algorithm analysis, divide and conquer algorithms,  dynamic  programming,  greedy  algorithms  etc.  algorithm  design  techniques,  and  NP  complete, randomized algorithms, approximation algorithms and other advanced topics.  计算理论  Theory of Computation This  course  gives  an  introduction  to  the  basics  of  computation  theory,  including:  Finite  Automata,  Regular language,  Pushdown  Automata,  Context-Free  Grammars,  Turing  machine,  undecidablity,  and  computational intractable topics (NP complete, PSPACE, BPP etc).  博弈论 Game Theory  It  is  preferable  that  students  have  studied basic  linear  algebra,  and  have  basic  calculus  skills. Although  this  is  not required because we will develop the mathematical skills as we introduce the material.  This  course will  serve  as  an  introduction  to  game  theory. We will begin  from  the  very  basics  of  game  theory. We will  work  on  important  concepts  like  Nash  equilibria,  and  end  with  a  taste  of  more  advanced  subjects  like evolutionary game theory and games on graphs.  近代物理（1）(英) Modern Physics (1)(in English)  This course will cover the basic formalism and modern applications of optics and atomic physics. In the optics part, we  will  introduce  geometric  optics,  wave  optics,  and  their  applications  in  the  current  research  frontier  such  as quantum  information  science.  For  the  atomic  physics  part,  we  will  present  many  interesting  experiments performed  in  early  20th  century  and  explain  how  these  results  lead  to  the  modern  understanding  of  atomic structure. Modern applications of optics and atomic physics,  such as  laser and  laser cooling of atoms, will also be discussed.  近代物理（2）（英）   Modern Physics(英)(in English) This  course  provides  undergraduate  students  with  background  in  science  and  engineering  the  foundation  to understand many  key  aspects  of  quantum  and  statistical  physics,  which  are  essential  for  learning  advanced  topics such  as  condensed-matter  physics,  quantum  field  theory,  and  quantum  information  science.  Conceptual understanding of the physical ideas and detailed mathematical derivations will be equally emphasized. Active class participation of students is expected.  计算机网络基础  Introduction to Computer Networks  This  course  aims  at  giving  a  comprehensive  introduction  to  the  fundamentals  of  computer  networks  and  network performance  analysis.  The  course  contains  two  parts.  The  first  part  covers  various  networking  topics  including network principles, Ethernet, WiFi, routing, inter-networking, transport, WiMax and LTE, QoS, and physical layer knowledge.  The  second  part  presents  mathematical  techniques  for  modeling,  analyzing  and  designing  computer systems,  including  convex  optimization,  queueing  theory,  game  theory  and   stochastic  analysis.  This  course  is intended for junior or senior undergraduate students in computer science or electrical engineering.   信息物理  The Physics of Information The 21st Century has seen a string of profound discoveries that  interface physics, information theory and computer science. This course will  introduce undergraduate  students  this exciting  frontier by connecting  the various physics and  computational  ideas  they  learn  in  first  year.  After  completion  of  the  course,  student s  will  appreciate  how information  theoretical  principles  led  to  new  understanding  in  physics,  and  how  new  physics  facilitated  new models of computation. Topics  include physical consequences of  the Church Turing  thesis, unravelling Maxwell's Demon through information thermodynamics, and the information theoretic consequences of quantum mechanics.   数据科学导论  Introduction to Data Science The course intends to motivate students by fundamental (selected) aspects  of Data Science. In this course, we discuss selected aspects of the concept of data, related techniques and aspects, and future achievements in the area of Data Science.   密码学基础  Fundamentals of Cryptography  The  purpose  of  this  unit  is  to  introduce  the  basic  concepts  of  modern  cryptography.  We  start  this  tour  by  a  very brief  introduction  to  classic  cryptography,  and  main  issues  related  to  the  distribution  of  digital  content  such  as confidentiality,  integrity and non-repudiation. After a short  introduction  to  the preliminaries, we will show several equivalent  cryptographic  primitives  and  their  reductions  to  each  other.  Privacy  issues  and  solutions  are  discussed in  the  context  of  modern  private-key  and  public-key  cryptography.  Next,  we  will  review  tools  allowing authentication  of  digital  content  using  hash  function  and  digital  signatures.  The  presented  constructions  are building  blocks  for  designing  secure  systems  and  protocols  for  real-world  applications.  Attacks  and  security analysis of the cryptographic schemes and protocols will also be discussed.   分布式计算（基础与系统）  Distributed Computing(Fundamentals and Systems)  Through  this  course,  students will  learn  fundamental  algorithms  and  principles  in  dis tributed  computing  systems, such as  logical clocks, consensus problem,  failure detection, Byzantine agreement, distributed  locking, and gossip protocols. They will also  learn how  to design and analyze distributed  systems using  these  fundamental algorithms and principles through the study of a number of advance distributed systems.   综合论文训练 Diploma Project (Thesis)  2本课程采用导师与学生一对一指导的形式，通过对当今计算机学科的最前沿问题或基础理论问题的研究，使学生学会如何着手开展科研工作，培养提出、分析与解决问题的能力，加强学生从事论文（研究）工作的书面和口头表达能力，以及协调组织能力。通过本环节的训练，学生应对计算机学科的科研工作有较全面的了解，并具有开展理论研究或研发工作的能力。论文题目在导师的指导下通过前期文献调研后确定。本课程要求学生在期末提交研究论文并进行口头报告和答辩，由多名教师组成的答辩委员会根据论文工作的质量和答辩的情况给出成绩。本课程要求学生至少将一篇有关的外文文献译成中文。  专题训练实践  Research Immersion Training 本课程设在大三年级夏季学期，是为大四年级的《计算机科学研究实践》和《综合论文训练》做准备。在该课程中，设置了算法理论、量子网络、复杂性研究、密码及安全、博弈论等专题，并根据学生的兴趣安排进入各专题训练小组进行专题研讨和实践，使学生在实际动手能力、创新思维、团队合作精神等方面得到锻炼和提高。  量子信息  Quantum Information Quantum  Information  is  a  course  offered  to  upper  level  undergraduate  students  (junior  or  senior  students  in  the Yao  Class,  physics,  EE,  and  computer  science  departments)  and  graduate  students.  The  course  will  cover  many topics  at  the  forefront  of  the  new  field  of  quantum  information  science,  including,  for  instance,  quantum entanglement  theory,  quantum  cryptography,  quantum  communication  theory,  quantum  computing  models, quantum  algorithms  and  complexity  theory,  quantum  error  correction  and  fault -tolerant  computation,  physical implementation of quantum computation, communication and networks.   计算机科学研究实践   Research Practice 1该课程为实践性课程。学生将赴国内外各著名研究院所进行为期一学期的研究实践，每位学生单独跟随各自的导师，参与到具体的、目前理论计算机领域最前沿的研究项目中去，进行研究型开发研讨等实践活动。该课程的目的是让学生真正接触到理论计算机科学研究的最前线，对自己所学理论知识有更深入、更实际的认识和应用。学生也有机会在该实践课程中在自己的研究实践领域发表论文。在该课程中，学生将会被要求进行正式的研究实践报告答辩，包括开题、期中和期末答辩。  大数据算法与模型  Algorithms and Models for Big Data Analysis, computation, and privacy issues over environments involving a huge amount of data.  Formal approaches: (i)  datastream  computation,  (ii)  property  testing  of  large  objects,  (iii)  big  data  statistics  and  machine  learning techniques (Bootstrapping, Bagging and  their variants), and if  time permits (iv)  introduction  to differential privacy (anonymizing databases). For these settings we study models and algorithms.   言语科学技术及创新应用  Speech Science, Technology and Innovative Applications  Speech communication refers to  the process of  transferring  information from one person  to  another by speaking  in a  specific  language.  It  is  a  highly  inter-disciplinary  subject, which  is  related  to  physiology,  linguistics,  phonetics, signal  processing,  and  computer  science.  Many  interesting  and  impactful  computer  applications  have  been developed  to  enable  and  improve  human-computer  and  human-human  speech  communications.  In  this  course, students  will  learn  the  scientific  fundamentals  underlying  human  speech  communication,  the  basic  techniques  of computer  speech  and  language  processing,  state-of-the-art  spoken  language  technologies  and  their  applications. Advanced research topics and future directions will also be discussed.   网络科学  Network Science Network  science  is  a  new  and  emerging  scientific  discipline  that  examines  the  interconnections  among  diverse physical or engineered networks, information networks, biological networks, cognitive and semantic networks, and social networks.In  this course, we examine  the many  facets of  internet from  the algorithmic perspective,  including for  instance  the mathematical modeling of  large-scale networks,  information  retrieval algorithms  for massive data sets,  algorithmic  game  theory  and  electronic  commerce.  Specific  topics  include  small  world  phenomena,  power law  distributions,  rank  aggregation,  web  crawling,  hubs  and  authorities,  clustering  large  data  sets,  streaming algorithms,  network  routing,  Nash  equilibrium,  market  clearing,  mechanism  design,  auction  theory,  social networks, etc.   